# HashSet in Rust

In Rust, a `HashSet` is a collection that stores unique elements in no particular order, using a hash-based implementation for efficient membership tests. `A HashSet is similar to a HashMap where the value is ().` So it's a HashMap with keys and no values.

## Creating a `HashSet`

`Hashset` is part of the Rust standard collections library, so we must include the `HashSet` module in our program.

```rust
use std::collections::HashSet;
```

A `HashSet` is created using the `new` method from the `std::collections` module. To make the `HashSet` mutable and allow modifications, the `mut` keyword is used.

Example:
```rust
let mut my_set = HashSet::new();
```
By default the `HashSet` will infer the type based on the inserted values, but you can also specify types explicitly.

Example:
```rust
let mut my_set: HashSet<String> = HashSet::new();
```

## Creating HashSet with Default Values
We can also create a hashset with default values using the `from()` method when creating it.

Example:
```rust
use std::collections::HashSet;

fn main() {
    // Create HashSet with default values using from() method
    let numbers1 = HashSet::from([2, 7, 8, 10]);

    println!("numbers = {:?}", numbers);
}
```

### Turning Vector into a HashSet

You can turn a `Vec` into a `HashSet` using the `into_iter()` method(consumes ownership), followed by the `collect()` method.

```rust
use std::collections::HashSet;

fn main() {
    // Turning a vector into a HashSet
    let my_vec: Vec<i32> = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
    let my_set: HashSet<_> = my_vec.into_iter().collect();

    println!("{:?}", my_set);
}
```
Note that the type of the HashSet is inferred using the `_` placeholder, but you can explicitly specify the type if needed.

## Adding elements to a HashSet

Elements can be added to a `HashSet` using the `insert` method. This method ensures that each element is unique within the set.

Example:
```rust
my_set.insert("apple");
my_set.insert("banana");
my_set.insert("orange");
```

> **Note:** Adding a new value to the hashset is only possible because of the mut variable declaration.

## Printing a HashSet

To print the contents of a `HashSet`, the `println!` macro is used with `{:?}` to display the elements.

Example:
```rust
println!("{:?}", my_set);
```

## Difference between HashSet and BTreeSet

In Rust, there are different types of sets available. `HashSet` uses a hash table for fast access, making it suitable for unordered data. On the other hand, `BTreeSet` uses a binary search tree, maintaining elements in sorted order. Here's an example of using `BTreeSet`:

```rust
// Just change HashSet to BTreeSet
use std::collections::BTreeSet;

let mut btree_set = BTreeSet::new();
btree_set.insert("apple");
btree_set.insert("banana");
btree_set.insert("orange");

println!("{:?}", btree_set);
```

## Accessing elements in a HashSet

To check if a specific element is present in a `HashSet`, you can use the `contains` method. The method returns `true` if the specified element is present in the hashset, otherwise returns `false`.

Example:
```rust
if my_set.contains("apple") {
    println!("The set contains 'apple'");
}
```

## Removing elements from a HashSet

To remove elements from a `HashSet`, you can use the `remove` method. This method takes the value to be removed as an argument.

Example:
```rust
my_set.remove("banana");
```

## Updating elements in a HashSet

To update an existing element in a `HashSet`, the `replace` method can be used. This method replaces the old value with the new one.

Example:
```rust
my_set.replace("apple", "grape");
```

By combining these operations, you can effectively create, modify, and print a `HashSet` in Rust.

## Iterate over Values of a HashSet

There are several ways to iterate over the values of a `HashSet`. The ownership status during iteration depends on whether you are iterating over references to the elements or consuming (taking ownership of) the elements.

### Iterating by References (Immutable Borrow)

Using an immutable reference to iterate over the values of a `HashSet`. This doesn't consume the elements, and ownership remains with the `HashSet`.

Example:
```rust
use std::collections::HashSet;

fn main() {
    let my_set: HashSet<i32> = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5].into_iter().collect();

    for value in my_set.iter() {
        println!("Reference to: {}", value);
    }
}
```

Here, the `iter` method is used to obtain an iterator over references to the elements. The type of `value` is `&i32`, indicating an immutable reference.

Using method chaining with closures,

The `.iter().for_each()` method chain is a concise way to iterate over the values of a `HashSet` using a closure. This method chain applies the given closure to each element in the iterator returned by `.iter()`.

Example:
```rust
use std::collections::HashSet;

fn main() {
    let my_set: HashSet<i32> = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5].into_iter().collect();

    // Using .iter().for_each() to print each element
    my_set.iter().for_each(|&value| {
        println!("Reference to: {}", value);
    });
}
```
Here, he closure takes an immutable reference to each element in the HashSet and prints it.

### Iterating by Mutable References (Mutable Borrow)

Using a mutable reference to iterate over the values of a `HashSet`. This allows modification of the elements in-place while still keeping ownership with the `HashSet`.

Example:
```rust
use std::collections::HashSet;

fn main() {
    let mut my_set: HashSet<i32> = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5].into_iter().collect();

    for value in my_set.iter_mut() {
        *value *= 2;  // Doubling each element in-place
    }

    println!("{:?}", my_set);
}
```

Here, the `iter_mut` method is used to obtain a mutable iterator, allowing modifications of the elements in the set.

Using method chaining with closures,

```rust
use std::collections::HashSet;

fn main() {
    let mut my_set: HashSet<i32> = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5].into_iter().collect();

    // Using .iter_mut().for_each() to double each element in-place
    my_set.iter_mut().for_each(|value| {
        *value *= 2;
    });

    println!("{:?}", my_set);
}
```
Here, the closure takes a mutable reference to each element in the HashSet and doubles its value in-place.

### Consuming Iteration (Ownership Transfer)

Using the `into_iter` method to consume the elements of the `HashSet`.

Example:
```rust
use std::collections::HashSet;

fn main() {
    let my_set: HashSet<i32> = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5].into_iter().collect();

    for value in my_set.into_iter() {
        println!("Owned value: {}", value);
    }
}
```

Here, `into_iter` is used to obtain an iterator that consumes the `HashSet`. The type of `value` is `i32`, indicating ownership transfer.

### Iterating with `for` loop (Ownership Transfer)

Using a `for` loop directly on the `HashSet` is concise but it will consume and transfer ownership.

Example:
```rust
use std::collections::HashSet;

fn main() {
    let my_set: HashSet<i32> = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5].into_iter().collect();

    for value in my_set {
        println!("Owned value: {}", value);
    }
}
```

### Using `drain` Method (Ownership Transfer with Removal)
The `drain()` method returns a draining iterator that consumes the `HashSet` and yields owned values. It also removes the elements from the set during iteration.

Example:
```rust
use std::collections::HashSet;

fn main() {
    let mut my_set: HashSet<i32> = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5].into_iter().collect();

    for value in my_set.drain() {
        println!("Owned and removed value: {}", value);
    }
}
```
Here, the `drain()` method is used to obtain a draining iterator, which both transfers ownership and removes elements from the set.

Choose the appropriate iteration method based on whether you need references, mutable references, or want to consume and take ownership of the elements in the `HashSet`. The ownership status is an important consideration in Rust to ensure memory safety and prevent unintended side effects.
